>> Jason Rodriguez: Well,
welcome everybody to HTML email v2.
This Frontend Masters workshop.
We have a fun day filled
with email delights aplenty.
I'm excited to kinda dig into some more
modern approaches to email development,
hopefully show you
a couple of new tricks and
interesting things you can do in email.
It should be a pretty quick workshop
because all we really need for
an email is this, right?
You just need an image dumped into some
HTML and then we send it on our way.
Now, we'll get in a couple of
reasons why this is a terrible idea.
And hopefully, you're not sending
emails that are all image-based.
>> Jason Rodriguez: To kick things off,
I'm Jason Rodriguez.
I work for a company called Litmus.
This is our logo.
Sometimes gets mistaken for like weird
Ironman logo or something like that.
I'm the email evangelist there.
I basically go around and
teach people about email design,
development, marketing practices.
I've written a couple of different
books on email development.
You can check out my website rodriguez
comma j dot com, or follow me on Twitter.
But I spend most of my
time thinking about email.
I like to say that I've lost most
of my hair because of that fact.
Usually dealing with Outlook and Gmail.
Until recently, Gmail's gotten a little
bit better in the last couple of years.
We'll look at how that's affected email
design development historically, and
kind of moving forward here.
So today,
we have a couple of things planned.
Pre-lunch, we're gonna be looking at
just the foundations of email design and
development.
So we're gonna be looking at
what HTML you're gonna use,
what CSS you're gonna use, and
how to make those emails accessible to
you, the widest range of users out there.
After lunch, we're gonna dig into more
about layouts and responsive design.
And then, we'll touch a little bit
on adding some interactivity to any
any email campaigns.
We're not gonna go super deep into that,
but
I'll show you some basics of how
interactivity in email actually works.
Because you don't have the luxury of
something like JavaScript in the inbox, so
we have to do a couple of hackier things
to get interactivity in email working.
>> Jason Rodriguez: To get started,
you don't really need anything very fancy.
We're not gonna be installing any
frameworks or JavaScript libraries or
anything like that.
You can use the editor of your choice.
I'll be using Visual Studio Code today.
But literally,
anything you can write HTML and CSS in and
see a preview works for
you, which is nice.
The tooling for
email development is super easy.
The one add-on I usually like
to have in my editor is Emmett,
which allows you to just quickly
expand code based on shortcuts.
So if you do have that, it's nice,
especially when we start using things like
tables for our development,
because that'll save you the trouble of
writing table tr td,
table tr td a million different times.
So Emmet's a good thing to have.
A lot of times, as you start getting
deeper into design development,
you'll start creating some well-worn
kind of battle tested codes.
So you'll wanna save those as snippets or
partials, and
most editors allow you to have
that functionality in there.
So that's a good thing to have, too.
When it comes to previewing our emails,
we're just gonna be using a browser.
I'll be using Chrome.
We will look at another
tool called Litmus,
which is obviously the company I work for.
But we have an extension for
Chrome that allows you
to preview your email campaigns in
almost 100 different email clients.
Which is really at the heart of email
development is figuring out what works
across all these different email
clients and knowing what HTML to use,
what CSS to use, and what breaks where.
So we'll see how that kind of works out so
we can preview those email campaigns,
make sure it's working as intended.
But really, browser works for you.
If you want to,
you can set up an Outlook account or
a couple different email addresses and
send your test emails in there.
It's always handy to test on real devices,
but Litmus kinda eases the pain for that.
The code up there I put in
both CodePen and GitHub.
The GitHub repo is nice because it has
a read me with a bunch of different
resources, links out to tools,
things we're gonna be talking about today.
So definitely check that out.
But if you do wanna see
the CodePen stuff and
have that kind of interactive environment,
it's up there as well.
But
github.com/rodriguezcommaj/frontendmasters
will get you that repo with all the kind
of finalized examples of what we're gonna
be looking at today.
>> Jason Rodriguez: So
anybody know who this guy is?
>> Jason Rodriguez: It's not my dad.
It's nothing like that.
So this is Ray Tomlinson.
Does anybody know what he did?
>> Jason Rodriguez: No?
He invented the modern concept of email.
I'm curious what year do you think
the first email was actually sent?
>> Jason Rodriguez: Anybody?
>> Speaker 2: 1969.
>> Jason Rodriguez: 69.
>> Jason Rodriguez: No, close.
1971 was the first use of
an email with that at symbol.
So prior to that,
people were using things like the ARPANET,
a precursor to the Internet, and
leaving messages on servers.
But Ray Tomlinson invented that idea
of using the at symbol for an email.
Who knows when the first kind of
marketing spam email was sent?
>> Speaker 2: '91.
>> Jason Rodriguez: '91.
>> Speaker 2: Early '90s.
>> Jason Rodriguez: Early '90s.
1978, actually.
Yeah, there was a guy named
Gary Thuerk who worked for
DEC, D-E-,C
the Digital Equipment Corporation,
which built like massive
mainframe computers and stuff.
So in '78,
he actually emailed a list of 400 people.
It was a message about DEC's new whatever
their mainframe was at the time.
So at this point, though, the ARPANET
was controlled by the government,
so it was the defense
communications agency,
I think it was, that was overseeing
this network of computers.
So when that happened, some military
guy contacted Gary Thuerk's boss and
was really pissed off
about that email campaign.
But it actually worked out really well.
He ended up generating
somewhere between 13 and
$14 million in sales from
that 400 person list.
But since then, we've kinda redefined and
seen how that definition of spam
has progressed over the years.
So in the last couple years, it's
something like 180 billion spam messages
are sent everyday,
which is insane to think about.
That's a lot of email that's
sent that nobody wants.
But it's interesting to see how
that's developed over time.